[MUSIC]
>> Douglas Crockford: I need to
demonstrate how this works because I can
talk all day about a function and
returns a function.
But if we don't actually mess with it,
it won't make any sense.
So, let me start with
a very simple example.
We're gonna make a function
called digit_name,
digit_name will take a string or
take a number and return a string.
Based on what that number is.
And it will do that by returning
an element from an array of strings.
So you can see this is very trivial and
unfortunately there's a problem
with the way I wrote this.
And that is I'm using a global
variable called names.
The problem with that is If
there is anything else in my
system that also has a global
variable called names.
We're gonna get a conflict and
either my functional fail or
theirs will fail or
maybe we both fail and that's bad.
And there is no way you can test for
that because you can't anticipate
all of the code that your code
is ever gonna have to run with.
And this is especially a problem in
browsers if you have to run with ads,
because ads come with some of
the worst code you've ever seen,
because they'll pay you to
take their crap, right?
And you can threaten them and say, we're
not gonna take your ads unless you clean
it up, and they'll say, okay,
we'll get our money to someone else.
And you say, all right,
just kidding, how it works and
they use lots of global variables and
eventually your gonna get the call.
Your stuff stopped working
because of some ad but
it's not the ads fault it's your fault.
So we need to reduce our
dependence on global variables.
So here is another way that
I could write this function.
Here I've got the digit name function and
it has a private variable called names,
because all variables are private
within the function scope.
So if there is a global variable
called names, no conflict, so
that's all really good.
The bad part is that every time I call
digit name, I'm going to have to construct
a new array, put ten things in it just so
I can take one thing out of it.
That's hugely expensive.
Now an optimizing compiler might observe
that names as invariant over indications,
and so it might try to optimize that out.
But optimizing compilers can take
many minutes to do their work, and
on the web we can't take many minutes.
We have to start instantly, so the
compilers are always gonna be really fast.
Get going quick compilers, so they're
not gonna do this so we need to do this.
So here's a third way
to write this function.
Here, I've got digit name, I've got
a function with the private variable
containing the names, but
this time I'm returning a function.
And the function I return
is going to use the name.
And I'm calling the outer function
immediately, which means that what I'm
going to be storing in the digit_name
is not the outer function, but
the return value of the outer function,
which happens to be the inner function.
And that inner function,
because of closure, will continue to
have access to the names variable.
Even after the green
function has returned.
This is the most important idea we're
gonna talk about over these three days so
I want to see everybody including you at
home nodding, like yeah, okay, I got that.
Okay, you didn't get it,
so let's do it again.
So let's start over.
This is the original one, okay?
We've got the global variable.
We've got our our simple
digit name function.
Now remember the thing we just
talked about with tenant and
his correspondence principle
that we can take any value.
Wrap it in a function that will
return that value, call that function
immediately and it's the same thing,
so I can do that in this case.
I'm gonna assign to
a digit_name the result
of a function which will return
a function that I call immediately.
So you can see that this and
this do exactly the same thing.
This one's just a little bit more code,
okay?
So everybody comfortable with that?
>> Speaker 2: Could you show those two?
>> Douglas Crockford: Yeah, so we're
got to assign a value to the variable.
We're going to assign the result of
calling a function that will return that
value in calling the function immediately.
>> Speaker 3: So in this in this example,
is the main benefit of using this that
we're preventing polluting the global
stack, or what are the benefits?
>> Douglas Crockford: Well, that's what
we'll get to, we haven't done that yet.
So these two are doing
exactly the same thing.
So let's go have the global
variable problem.
We haven't fixed anything yet.
Getting setup.
Now you're familiar with the idea that we
can have local variables,
declare a variable within a function
that's local to the function.
And we've got global variables
which all the functions can see.
But we can have, so
that's two worlds, right,
you can think of it as like the instance
world and the static world.
It's not exactly like that but
it's kinda like that,
we've got two levels of visibility.
But we can go much finer because every
time we nest a function, we get a new
place where we can keep stuff,
another place where you can get variables.
And each function will
determine the visibility and
the lifetime of the variables
that are defined inside of it.
And so, it's not just local and
global we can now have
in between scopes and
and they're just scopes.
So I'm gonna make one change to this one.
I'm gonna take this global variable and
I'm going to just move it down one line
to be inside of the outer function, okay?
So we've introduced a third place
where we can keep stuff which is now
in the scope of the outer function.
This is the same result
that we had before.
Okay, so we've got digit name
which will receive a value
which is a function which is obtained
from a function that we call immediately.
And that inner function will continue
to have access to the names variable of
the outer function.
>> Douglas Crockford: So this is closure.
This is the big idea,
the key idea in functional programming.
And this is the good stuff.
This is the good part.
We're gonna spend a lot of time
tomorrow playing with this model.
Any questions before we go
on to the next one, yeah?
>> Speaker 4: So, you solved the global
variable problem by moving it in there but
you said the solution to this was that
basically you move the invocation,
move everything into a heap?
Great, so now in heap are you going to
have three instances of the names array?
If you call alert digit name
three then four then five.
>> Douglas Crockford: No, so
that's a really good question.
So you're familiar with the idea
of an activation record
in a programming language.
So the activation record will
contain the return address.
Contain all the input parameters and
might also contain local
arguments and her local variables and
stuff like that.
So, in JavaScript, or
in a functional language like this,
the activation, a function object
will contain a pointer to the code.
So it knows what to execute
when the function is invoked,
and the function object will contain
a reference to the activation of
the function that created it.
So this case, this function or
the object that is
created by that function
expression will be linked
to the context of the green
function that created it.
So through that activation connection
it will have access to the names
variable not to the value of the names
variable that it was created with but
the actual names variable itself.
It will always have access to that and
will continue to have it
as long as it survives.
If at some point I said digit name to
undefined at that point all of that
stuff can get garbage collected.
But until then,
as long as the inner function survives and
needs that activation, it will keep it and
the garbage collector will not touch it.
So when we call digit name,
we'll be calling this function which will
simply go to the array and return a value.
So we can call it with one,
two, three, and
we're just calling it and
returning three values.
We're not creating any stuff because
we're just calling that little function.
>> Douglas Crockford: So let me show
you a slightly more complex example.
This is the fade function.
The fade function is something
we might run in a browser which
will pass in the ID of a DOM element.
And it will change the colors
of that element from
yellow to white gradually
over a couple seconds and
so, here is that the fade function.
First thing it will do is,
it will use document that
get element by ID to look up the ID and
obtain a dominant element.
And it will create a variable called
level and it will set it to 1.
It will create a function called step and
it will then call step timeout which
will call step in 100 milliseconds,
and then it returns.
So at this point, the fade function
has finished its return, it's done.
Suddenly, 100 milliseconds later
the step function runs, so
the step function will go
to its level variable.
The actual level variable
of the parent function,
and turn it into a hex character.
It will go to the DOM element
in change its background color,
it will go to the level variable again.
If it's less than fifteen which will be
because it was one we will add one to it.
We're now changing the value of
the variable in the outer function.
And we'll call set timeout
to do this again and
we'll keep doing it until eventually
level gets up to 15 and then we stop.
And at that point, the garbage collector
can come in and take it all out.
>> Speaker 5: So you better call
you would just say, fade 75,
times you don't have to say,
var X equals fade 75, you just fade 75.
>> Douglas Crockford: Will
be probably give it a name.
>> Speaker 5: Will be garbage
collector if we don't even name?
>> Douglas Crockford: No, I mean I mean
that the argument to fade will probably
because we're talking to a DOM and
certainly has been heard to be the strings
[INAUDIBLE] yeah, but
yeah, so we can do that.
So suppose there are two DOM elements and
we want to feed them both simultaneously.
So we call feed a fade be immediately.
Will there be any conflict between them?
And the answer is no because
every time we call fade,
we get a new DOM variable, we get a new
level variable and a new step function.
And they will not interfere with each
other they're all within their own
function scopes and
will be completely unique.
So one of the nice things about this
construction is that we get that
separation.
So that we can have lots
of complex behavior going
on without those behaviors
interfering with each other.
>> Speaker 5: Each time you call
fade start time out passes a new
instance of the step function to DOM,
is that correct?
And so, the DOM doesn't encourage
collect those step functions
until after its invoke the timeout
after it's called out function.
>> Douglas Crockford: The DOM is
only involved in that with column,
we're looking at the style
to change the color.
Otherwise, the dom is
not aware of that any-
>> Speaker 5: I'm sorry, setTimeout is-
>> Douglas Crockford: Yeah, the setTimeout
is, doesn't actually belong to JavaScript,
it does belong to the browser.
>> Speaker 5: Browser.
>> Douglas Crockford: Also has it.
Yeah, so each time we call fade,
we will make a new step function and
we'll pass that step function many
times to set timeout until we finish.
>> Speaker 5: I was just trying
to get my head around why
step doesn't get garbage collected.
It's because the browser.
>> Douglas Crockford: Right, cuz the
browser's holding it in its timer queue.
>> Speaker 5: Okay, its timer queue.
>> Douglas Crockford: And and
as long as anything in the system
is aware of something that's rooted in
the garbage collector won't touch it.
>> Speaker 5: Okay, thanks.
>> Douglas Crockford: Yes.
>> Speaker 6: What's the initial
value of h when you declared that?
>> Douglas Crockford: First
time H will be the string one.
>> Speaker 6: And
then what does the two string 16 do?
>> Douglas Crockford: 16,
toString 16 means make a hex character,
so this will give us from one to F.
And then, we add them to here so
the file color will be pure white,
so it'll be FFFFF